---
title: Mentor Me! 11 Questions I’d Like You to Answer
author: joshuapsteele
type: post
date: 2022-04-15T20:24:45+00:00
url: /mentor-me/
mf2_syndication:
  - 'a:0:{}'
categories:
  - Uncategorized
tags:
  - questions

---
Say what you will about Tim Ferriss, I&#8217;ve always really enjoyed the <a href="https://tim.blog/wp-content/uploads/2020/01/17-Questions-That-Changed-My-Life.pdf" target="_blank" rel="noreferrer noopener">questions that he asks himself</a> and <a href="https://tim.blog/2017/10/03/tribe-of-mentors/" target="_blank" rel="noreferrer noopener">others</a>.

I also really enjoy LEARNING as much as I can from other people. And so, with that in mind, I&#8217;d like to &#8220;open source&#8221; my search for mentors and **invite you, dear reader, to answer at least one of the questions below.** 

**Please comment your answers below** this post (that way others can benefit from your knowledge as well!). Or, if you&#8217;d like, send them to me via email ([use my contact form here][1]). Then, go ask these questions to others! Cheers!

  1. What is the book (or books) you’ve given most as a gift, and why? Or what are one to three books that have greatly influenced your life?
  2. What purchase of $100 or less has most positively impacted your life in the last six months (or in recent memory)?
  3. How has a failure, or apparent failure, set you up for later success? Do you have a “favorite failure” of yours?
  4. If you could have a gigantic billboard anywhere with anything on it — metaphorically speaking, getting a message out to millions or billions — what would it say and why? It could be a few words or a paragraph. (If helpful, it can be someone else’s quote: Are there any quotes you think of often or live your life by?)
  5. What is one of the best or most worthwhile investments you’ve ever made? (Could be an investment of money, time, energy, etc.)
  6. What is an unusual habit or an absurd thing that you love?
  7. In the last five years, what new belief, behavior, or habit has most improved your life?
  8. What advice would you give to a smart, driven college student about to enter the “real world”? What advice should they ignore?
  9. What are bad recommendations you hear in your profession or area of expertise?
 10. In the last five years, what have you become better at saying no to (distractions, invitations, etc.)? What new realizations and/or approaches helped? Any other tips?
 11. When you feel overwhelmed or unfocused, or have lost your focus temporarily, what do you do? (If helpful: What questions do you ask yourself?)

Source for these questions: <a href="https://tim.blog/2017/10/03/tribe-of-mentors/" target="_blank" rel="noreferrer noopener">Tim Ferriss, <em>Tribe of Mentors</em></a>.

Want more great questions? Check out <a href="https://www.curatedquestions.com/" target="_blank" rel="noreferrer noopener">Curated Questions</a>.

 [1]: https://joshuapsteele.com/contact/